# 3. The SQL Language

## Chapter 3. The SQL Language

This chapter covers SQL fundamentals including its [standards](https://learning.oreilly.com/library/view/sql-pocket-guide/9781492090397/ch03.html#ansi\_standards), [key terms](https://learning.oreilly.com/library/view/sql-pocket-guide/9781492090397/ch03.html#sql\_terms), and [sublanguages](https://learning.oreilly.com/library/view/sql-pocket-guide/9781492090397/ch03.html#sublanguages), along with answers to the following questions:

* What is [ANSI SQL](https://learning.oreilly.com/library/view/sql-pocket-guide/9781492090397/ch03.html#ansi\_standards) and how is it different from SQL?
* What is a [keyword](https://learning.oreilly.com/library/view/sql-pocket-guide/9781492090397/ch03.html#keywords) versus a [clause](https://learning.oreilly.com/library/view/sql-pocket-guide/9781492090397/ch03.html#clauses)?
* Do [capitalization](https://learning.oreilly.com/library/view/sql-pocket-guide/9781492090397/ch03.html#sql\_is\_case\_insensitive) and [whitespace](https://learning.oreilly.com/library/view/sql-pocket-guide/9781492090397/ch03.html#whitespace) matter?
* What is there [beyond the `SELECT` statement](https://learning.oreilly.com/library/view/sql-pocket-guide/9781492090397/ch03.html#sublanguages)?

## Comparison to Other Languages

Some people in the technology space don’t consider SQL to be a real programming language.

While SQL stands for “Structured Query _Language_,” you can’t use it in the same way as some other popular programming languages like Python, Java, or C++. With those languages, you can write code to specify the exact steps that a computer should take to get a task done. This is called _imperative programming_.

In Python, if you want to sum up a list of values, you can tell the computer exactly _how_ you want to do so. The following example code goes through a list, item by item, and adds each value to a running total, to finally calculate the total sum:

```
calories = [90, 240, 165]
total = 0
for c in calories:
    total += c
print(total)
```

With SQL, instead of telling a computer exactly _how_ you want to do something, you just describe _what_ you want done, which in this case is to calculate the sum. Behind the scenes, SQL figures out how to optimally execute the code. This is called _declarative programming_.

```
SELECT SUM(calories)
FROM workouts;
```

The main takeaway here is that SQL is not a _general-purpose programming language_ like Python, Java, or C++, which can be used for a variety of applications. Instead, SQL is a _special-purpose programming language_, specifically made for managing data in a relational database.

**EXTENSIONS FOR SQL**

At its core, SQL is a declarative language, but there are extensions that allow it to do more:

* _Oracle_ has _procedural language SQL_ (PL/SQL)
* _SQL Server_ has _transact SQL_ (T-SQL)

With these extensions, you can do things like group together SQL code into procedures and functions, and more. The syntax doesn’t follow ANSI standards, but it makes SQL much more powerful.

## ANSI Standards

The _American National Standards Institute_ (ANSI) is an organization based in the United States that documents standards on everything from drinking water to nuts and bolts.

SQL became an ANSI standard in 1986. In 1989, they published a very detailed document of specifications (think hundreds of pages) on what a database language should be able to do and how it should be done. Every few years, the standards get updated, so that’s why you’ll hear terms like ANSI-89 and ANSI-92, which were different sets of SQL standards that were added in 1989 and 1992, respectively. The latest standard is ANSI SQL2016.

**SQL VERSUS ANSI SQL VERSUS MYSQL VERSUS …**

_SQL_ is the general term for structured query language.

_ANSI SQL_ refers to SQL code that follows the ANSI standards and will run in any relational database management system (RDBMS) software.

_MySQL_ is one of many RDBMS options. Within MySQL, you can write both ANSI code and MySQL-specific SQL code.

Other RDBMS options include _Oracle_, _PostgreSQL_, _SQL Server_, _SQLite_, and others.

Even with the standards, no two RDBMSs are exactly the same. While some aim to be fully ANSI compliant, they are all just partially ANSI compliant. Each vendor ends up choosing which standards to implement and which additional features to build that only work within their software.

**SHOULD I FOLLOW THE STANDARDS?**

Most of the basic SQL code you write adheres to ANSI standards. If you find code that does something complex using simple yet unfamiliar keywords, then there’s a good chance it’s outside of the standards.

If you work solely within one RDBMS, like _Oracle_ or _SQL Server_, it is absolutely fine to not follow the ANSI standards and take advantage of all of the features of the software.

The issue comes when you have code working in one RDBMS that you want to use in another RDBMS. Non-ANSI code likely won’t run in the new RDBMS and would need to be rewritten.

Let’s say you have the following query that works in _Oracle_. It does not meet ANSI standards because the `DECODE` function is only available within _Oracle_ and not other software. If I copy the query over to _SQL Server_, the code will not run:

```
-- Oracle-specific code
SELECT item, DECODE (flag, 0, 'No', 1, 'Yes')
             AS Yes_or_No
FROM items;
```

The following query has the same logic, but uses a `CASE` statement instead, which is an ANSI standard. Because of this, it will work in _Oracle_, _SQL Server_, and other software:

```
-- Code that works in any RDBMS
SELECT item, CASE WHEN flag = 0 THEN 'No'
             ELSE 'Yes' END AS Yes_or_No
FROM items;
```

**WHICH STANDARD SHOULD I CHOOSE?**

The following two code blocks perform a join using two different standards. ANSI-89 was the first widely adopted standard, followed by ANSI-92, which included some major revisions.

```
-- ANSI-89
SELECT c.id, c.name, o.date
FROM customer c, order o
WHERE c.id = o.id;
```

```
-- ANSI-92
SELECT c.id, c.name, o.date
FROM customer c INNER JOIN order o
ON c.id = o.id;
```

If you’re writing new SQL code, I would recommend either using the latest standard (which is currently ANSI SQL2016) or the syntax provided in the documentation of the RDBMS you are working in.

However, it’s important to be aware of the earlier standards because you will likely come across older code if your company has been around for a few decades.

## SQL Terms

Here is a block of SQL code that shows the number of sales each employee closed in 2021. We’ll be using this code block to highlight a number of SQL terms.

```
-- Sales closed in 2021
SELECT e.name, COUNT(s.sale_id) AS num_sales
FROM employee e
  LEFT JOIN sales s ON e.emp_id = s.emp_id
WHERE YEAR(s.sale_date) = 2021
  AND s.closed IS NOT NULL
GROUP BY e.name;
```

### Keywords and Functions

Keywords and functions are terms built into SQL.

#### Keywords

A _keyword_ is text that already has some meaning in SQL. All the keywords in the code block are bolded here:

<pre><code><strong>SELECT e.name, COUNT(s.sale_id) AS num_sales
</strong><strong>FROM employee e
</strong><strong>  LEFT JOIN sales s ON e.emp_id = s.emp_id
</strong><strong>WHERE YEAR(s.sale_date) = 2021
</strong><strong>  AND s.closed IS NOT NULL
</strong><strong>GROUP BY e.name;
</strong></code></pre>

**SQL IS CASE-INSENSITIVE**

Keywords are typically capitalized for readability. However, SQL is case-insensitive, meaning that an uppercase `WHERE` and a lowercase `where` mean the same thing when the code is run.

#### Functions

A _function_ is a special type of keyword. It takes in zero or more inputs, does something to the inputs, and returns an output. In SQL, a function is usually followed by parentheses, but not always. The two functions in the code block are bolded here:

<pre><code><strong>SELECT e.name, COUNT(s.sale_id) AS num_sales
</strong>FROM employee e
  LEFT JOIN sales s ON e.emp_id = s.emp_id
<strong>WHERE YEAR(s.sale_date) = 2021
</strong>  AND s.closed IS NOT NULL
GROUP BY e.name;
</code></pre>

There are four categories of functions: numeric, string, datetime, and other:

* `COUNT()` is a numeric function. It takes in a column and returns the number of non-null rows (rows that have a value).
* `YEAR()` is a date function. It takes in a column of a date or datetime data type, extracts the years, and returns the values as a new column.

A list of common functions can be found in [Table 7-2](https://learning.oreilly.com/library/view/sql-pocket-guide/9781492090397/ch07.html#common\_functions).

### Identifiers and Aliases

Identifiers and aliases are terms that the user defines.

#### Identifiers

An _identifier_ is the name of a database object, such as a table or a column. All identifiers in the code block are bolded here:

<pre><code><strong>SELECT e.name, COUNT(s.sale_id) AS num_sales
</strong><strong>FROM employee e
</strong><strong>  LEFT JOIN sales s ON e.emp_id = s.emp_id
</strong><strong>WHERE YEAR(s.sale_date) = 2021
</strong><strong>  AND s.closed IS NOT NULL
</strong><strong>GROUP BY e.name;
</strong></code></pre>

Identifiers should start with a letter (`a`-`z` or `A`-`Z`), followed by any combination of letters, numbers, and underscores (`_`). Some software will allow additional characters such as `@`, `#`, and `$`.

For readability’s sake, identifiers are typically lowercase while keywords are uppercase, although the code will run regardless of case.

**TIP**

As a best practice, identifiers should not be given the same name as an existing keyword. For example, you wouldn’t want to name a column `COUNT` because that is already a keyword in SQL.

If you still choose to do so, you can avoid confusion by enclosing the identifier in double quotes. So instead of naming a column `COUNT`, you can name it `"COUNT"`, but it is best to use a completely different name altogether like `num_sales`.

_MySQL_ uses backticks (\`\`) to enclose identifiers instead of double quotes (`""`).

#### Aliases

An _alias_ renames a column or a table temporarily, only for the duration of the query. In other words, the new alias names will be displayed in the results of the query, but the original column names will remain unchanged in the tables you are querying from. All the aliases in the code block are bolded here:

<pre><code><strong>SELECT e.name, COUNT(s.sale_id) AS num_sales
</strong><strong>FROM employee e
</strong><strong>  LEFT JOIN sales s ON e.emp_id = s.emp_id
</strong><strong>WHERE YEAR(s.sale_date) = 2021
</strong><strong>  AND s.closed IS NOT NULL
</strong><strong>GROUP BY e.name;
</strong></code></pre>

The standard is to use `AS` when renaming columns (`AS num_sales`) and no additional text when renaming tables (`e`). Technically, though, either syntax works for both columns and tables.

In addition to columns and tables, aliases are also useful if you’d like to temporarily name a [subquery](https://learning.oreilly.com/library/view/sql-pocket-guide/9781492090397/ch04.html#from\_subqueries).

### Statements and Clauses

These are ways to refer to subsets of SQL code.

#### Statements

A _statement_ starts with a keyword and ends with a semicolon. This entire code block is called a `SELECT` statement because it starts with the keyword `SELECT`.

```
SELECT e.name, COUNT(s.sale_id) AS num_sales
FROM employee e
  LEFT JOIN sales s ON e.emp_id = s.emp_id
WHERE YEAR(s.sale_date) = 2021
  AND s.closed IS NOT NULL
GROUP BY e.name;
```

**TIP**

Many [database tools](https://learning.oreilly.com/library/view/sql-pocket-guide/9781492090397/ch02.html#database\_tools) that provide a graphical user interface do not require a semicolon (`;`) at the end of a statement.

The `SELECT` statement is the most popular type of SQL statement, and is often called a query instead because it finds data in a database. Other types of statements are covered in [“Sublanguages”](https://learning.oreilly.com/library/view/sql-pocket-guide/9781492090397/ch03.html#sublanguages).

#### Clauses

A _clause_ is a way to refer to a particular section of a statement. Here is our original `SELECT` statement:

```
SELECT e.name, COUNT(s.sale_id) AS num_sales
FROM employee e
  LEFT JOIN sales s ON e.emp_id = s.emp_id
WHERE YEAR(s.sale_date) = 2021
  AND s.closed IS NOT NULL
GROUP BY e.name;
```

This statement contains four main clauses:

*   `SELECT` clause

    ```
    SELECT e.name, COUNT(s.sale_id) AS num_sales
    ```
*   `FROM` clause

    ```
    FROM employee e
      LEFT JOIN sales s ON e.emp_id = s.emp_id
    ```
*   `WHERE` clause

    ```
    WHERE YEAR(s.sale_date) = 2021
      AND s.closed IS NOT NULL
    ```
*   `GROUP BY` clause

    ```
    GROUP BY e.name;
    ```

In conversation, you’ll often hear people refer to a section of a statement like “take a look at the tables in the `FROM` clause.” It’s a helpful way to zoom in on a particular section of the code.

**NOTE**

This statement actually has more clauses than the four listed. In grammar, a clause is a part of a sentence that contains a subject and a verb. So you could refer to the following:

```
LEFT JOIN sales s ON e.emp_id = s.emp_id
```

as the `LEFT JOIN` clause if you want to get even more specific about the section of the code that you are referring to.

The six most popular clauses start with `SELECT`, `FROM`, `WHERE`, `GROUP BY`, `HAVING`, and `ORDER BY` and are covered in detail in [Chapter 4](https://learning.oreilly.com/library/view/sql-pocket-guide/9781492090397/ch04.html#querying\_basics).

### Expressions and Predicates

These are combinations of [functions](https://learning.oreilly.com/library/view/sql-pocket-guide/9781492090397/ch03.html#functions), [identifiers](https://learning.oreilly.com/library/view/sql-pocket-guide/9781492090397/ch03.html#identifiers), and more.

#### Expressions

An _expression_ can be thought of as a formula that results in a value. An expression in the code block was:

```
COUNT(s.sale_id)
```

This expression includes a function (`COUNT`) and an identifier (`s.sale_id`). Together, they make an expression that says to count the number of sales.

Other examples of expressions are:

* `s.sale_id + 10` is a numeric expression that incorporates basic math operations.
* `CURRENT_DATE` is a datetime expression, simply a single function, that returns the current date.

#### Predicates

A _predicate_ is a logical comparison that results in one of three values: `TRUE`/`FALSE`/`UNKNOWN`. They are sometimes called _conditional statements_. The three predicates in the code block are bolded here:

<pre><code>SELECT e.name, COUNT(s.sale_id) AS num_sales
FROM employee e
<strong>  LEFT JOIN sales s ON e.emp_id = s.emp_id
</strong><strong>WHERE YEAR(s.sale_date) = 2021
</strong><strong>  AND s.closed IS NOT NULL
</strong>GROUP BY e.name;
</code></pre>

Some things you’ll notice from these examples are:

* The equal sign (`=`) is the most popular [operator](https://learning.oreilly.com/library/view/sql-pocket-guide/9781492090397/ch07.html#operators) to compare values.
* The `NULL` stands for no value. When checking to see if a field has no value, instead of writing `= NULL`, you would write `IS NULL`.

### Comments, Quotes, and Whitespace

These are punctuation marks with meaning in SQL.

#### Comments

A _comment_ is text that is ignored when the code is run, like the following.

```
-- Sales closed in 2021
```

It is useful to include comments in your code so that other reviewers of your code (including your future self!) can quickly understand the intent of the code without reading all of it.

To comment out:

* A single line of text:

```
-- These are my comments
```

* Multiple lines of text:

```
/* These are
my comments */
```

#### Quotes

There are two types of quotes you can use in SQL, the single quote and the double quote.

```
SELECT "This column"
FROM my_table
WHERE name = 'Bob';
```

Single Quotes: Strings

Take a look at `'Bob'`. Single quotes are used when referring to a string value. You will see far more single quotes in practice compared to double quotes.

Double Quotes: Identifiers

Take a look at `"This column"`. Double quotes are used when referring to an [identifier](https://learning.oreilly.com/library/view/sql-pocket-guide/9781492090397/ch03.html#identifiers). In this case, because there is a space in between `This` and `column`, the double quotes are necessary for `This column` to be interpreted as a column name. Without the double quotes, SQL would throw an error due to the space. That said, it is best practice to use `_` instead of spaces when naming columns to avoid using the double quotes.

**NOTE**

_MySQL_ uses backticks (\`\`) to enclose identifiers instead of double quotes (`""`).

#### Whitespace

SQL does not care about the number of spaces between terms. Whether it’s one space, a tab, or a new line, SQL will execute the query from the first keyword all the way to the semicolon at the end of the statement. The following two queries are equivalent.

```
SELECT * FROM my_table;
```

```
SELECT *
  FROM my_table;
```

**NOTE**

For simple SQL queries, you may see code all written on one line. For longer queries that have dozens or even hundreds of lines, you’ll see new lines for new clauses, tabs when listing many columns or tables, etc.

The end goal is to have readable code, so you’ll need to decide how you want to space out your code (or follow your company’s guidelines) so that it looks clean and can be quickly skimmed.

## Sublanguages

There are many types of statements that can be written within SQL. They all fall under one of five sublanguages, which are detailed in [Table 3-1](https://learning.oreilly.com/library/view/sql-pocket-guide/9781492090397/ch03.html#sublanguage\_table).

| Sublanguage                        | Description                                                                                                                                                                                   | Common Commands            | Reference Sections                                                                                                                                       |
| ---------------------------------- | --------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- | -------------------------- | -------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| Data Query Language (DQL)          | This is the language that most people are familiar with. These statements are used to retrieve information from a database object, such as a table, and are often referred to as SQL queries. | `SELECT`                   | The majority of this book is dedicated to DQL                                                                                                            |
| Data Definition Language (DDL)     | This is the language used to define or create a database object, such as a table or an index.                                                                                                 | `CREATE` `ALTER` `DROP`    | [Creating, Updating, and Deleting](https://learning.oreilly.com/library/view/sql-pocket-guide/9781492090397/ch05.html#creating\_updating\_and\_deleting) |
| Data Manipulation Language (DML)   | This is the language used to manipulate or modify data in a database.                                                                                                                         | `INSERT` `UPDATE` `DELETE` | [Creating, Updating, and Deleting](https://learning.oreilly.com/library/view/sql-pocket-guide/9781492090397/ch05.html#creating\_updating\_and\_deleting) |
| Data Control Language (DCL)        | This is the language used to control access to data in a database, which are sometimes referred to as permissions or privileges.                                                              | `GRANT` `REVOKE`           | Not covered                                                                                                                                              |
| Transaction Control Language (TCL) | This is the language used to manage transactions in a database, or apply permanent changes to a database.                                                                                     | `COMMIT` `ROLLBACK`        | [Transaction Management](https://learning.oreilly.com/library/view/sql-pocket-guide/9781492090397/ch05.html#transaction\_management)                     |

While most data analysts and data scientists will write DQL `SELECT` statements to query tables, it is important to know that database administrators and data engineers will also write code in these other sublanguages to maintain a database.

**THE SQL LANGUAGE SUMMARY**

* ANSI SQL is standardized SQL code that works across all database software. Many RDBMSs have extensions that don’t meet the standards but add functionality to their software.
* Keywords are terms that are reserved in SQL and have a special meaning.
* Clauses refer to particular sections of a statement. Common clauses are `SELECT`, `FROM`, `WHERE`, `GROUP BY`, `HAVING`, and `ORDER BY`.
* Capitalization and whitespace do not matter in SQL for execution, but there are best practices for readability.
* In addition to `SELECT` statements, there are commands for defining objects, manipulating data, and more.
