# Answers To Assessment Test

1. B. Cloud Dataproc is a Hadoop and Spark managed service. Option A is incorrect; Cloud Dataprep is service for preparing data for analysis. Option C is incorrect; Cloud Dataflow is an implementation of Apache Beam, a stream and batch processing service. Option D is incorrect; Cloud Pub/Sub is a messaging service that can buffer data in a topic until a service is ready to process the data.
2. C. Cloud Firestore is a managed document database that supports flexible schemas and transactions. Option A is incorrect; Cloud SQL does not support flexible schemas. Option B is incorrect; BigQuery is an analytical database, not a NoSQL database with a flexible schema. Option D is incorrect; Cloud Storage is an object storage system, not a NoSQL database.
3. C. The AI Platform is a managed service for machine learning, which is needed to provide recommendations. Options A and B are incorrect because, although they are useful for storing data, they do not provide managed machine learning services. Option D is incorrect; Cloud Datastore is a NoSQL database.
4. C. Cloud Storage Coldline is the lowest-cost option, and it is designed for data that is accessed less than once a year. Options A and B are incorrect because they cost more than Coldline storage. Option D is incorrect because Cloud Bigtable is a low-latency, wide-column database.
5. D. Shielded VMs are instances with additional security controls. Option A is incorrect; IAM is used for managing identities and authorizations. Option B is incorrect; the Cloud Key Management Service is a service for managing encryption keys. Option C is incorrect; Cloud Identity is used for authentication.
6. A. Cloud Functions is a managed serverless product that is able to respond to events in the cloud, such as creating a file in Cloud Storage. Option B is incorrect; Cloud Storage Nearline is a class of object storage. Option C is incorrect; Cloud Dataflow is a stream and batch processing service that does not respond to events. Option D is incorrect; Cloud Dataproc is a managed Hadoop and Spark service.
7. B. A poorly designed row key could be causing hot spotting. Option A is incorrect; more nodes in a cluster will not increase latency. Option C is incorrect; the number of column families on its own would not lead to higher latency. Option D is incorrect; Bigtable does not have indexes.
8. C. The General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR) is a European Union regulation protecting personal information of persons in and citizens of the European Union. Option A is incorrect; HIPAA is a U.S. healthcare regulation. Option B is incorrect; PCI-DSS is a self-imposed global security standard by major brands in the credit card industry, not a government regulation. Although not necessarily law, the standard may be applicable to the start-up in Europe if it accepts payment cards for brands that require PCI-DSS compliance. Option D is a U.S. regulation that applies to all publicly traded companies in the United States, and wholly-owned subsidiaries and foreign companies that are publicly traded and do business in the United States - the company may be subject to that regulation already, and expanding to Europe will not change its status.
9. C. BigQuery is an analytical database that supports SQL. Options A and B are incorrect because, although they could be used for ad hoc analysis, doing so would require more administrative overhead. Option D is incorrect; the Cloud Functions feature is intended for running short programs in response to events in GCP.
10. C. Cloud Spanner is a globally scalable, strongly consistent relational database that can be queried using SQL. Option A is incorrect because it will not scale to the global scale as Cloud Spanner will, and it does not support storing 50 TB of data. Option B is incorrect; the requirements call for a transaction processing system, and BigQuery is designed for analytics and data warehousing. Option D is incorrect; Cloud Dataflow is a stream and batch processing service.
11. B. Cloud Firestore stores data redundantly when multiple indexes are used, so having more indexes will lead to greater storage sizes. Option A is incorrect; Cloud Firestore is a NoSQL document database that supports a denormalized data model without using excessive storage. Option C is incorrect; you do not configure nodes in Cloud Firestore. Option D is incorrect; column families are not used with document databases such as Cloud Firestore.
12. A. Partitioning by purchase date will keep all data for a day in a single partition. Clustering by customer will order the data in a partition by customer. This strategy will minimize the amount of data that needs to be scanned in order to answer a query by purchase date and customer. Option B is incorrect; clustering by product does not help reduce the amount of data scanned for date and customer-based queries. Option C is incorrect because partitioning by customer is not helpful in reducing the amount of data scanned. Option D is incorrect because partitioning by customer would spread data from one date over many partitions, and that would lead to scanning more data than partitioning by purchase date.
13. B. Cloud Dataflow is a stream and batch processing managed service that is a good replacement for Java ELT programs. Option A is incorrect; Data Studio is a reporting tool. Option C is incorrect; Cloud Bigtable is a NoSQL, wide-column database. Option D is incorrect; BigQuery is an analytical database.
14. D. This is a case of the model overfitting the training data. Regularization is a set of methods used to reduce the risk of overfitting. Option A is incorrect; feature engineering could be used to create new features if the existing set of features was not sufficient, but that is not a problem in this case. Option B is incorrect; validation testing will not improve the quality of the model, but it will measure the quality. Option C is incorrect; the existing dataset has a sufficient number of training instances.
15. C. Cloud Pub/Sub is a good replacement for Kafka, and Cloud Firestore is a good replacement for MongoDB, which is another document database. Option A is incorrect; Cloud Dataflow is for stream and batch processing, not ingestion. Option B is incorrect; there is no database in the option. Option D is incorrect; BigQuery is analytical database and not a good replacement for a document database such as MongoDB.
16. C. Cloud Dataproc is a managed Hadoop and Spark service; Spark has a machine learning library called MLlib, and Spark is an open source platform that can run in other clouds. Option A is incorrect; BigQuery is a managed data warehouse and analytical database that is not available in other clouds. Option B is incorrect; Cloud Storage is used for unstructured data and not a substitute for a Hadoop/Spark platform. Option D is incorrect; Cloud Spanner is used for global transaction-processing systems, not large-scale analytics and machine learning.
17. B. Cloud Dataflow is well suited to transforming batch data, and Cloud Datalab is a Jupyter Notebook managed service, which is useful for ad hoc analysis using Python. Options A, B, and C are incorrect. Data Studio is a reporting tool, and that is not needed in this use case.
18. B. The roles/storage.objectViewer role allows users to view objects and list metadata. Option A is incorrect; roles/storage.objectCreator allows a user to create an object only. Option C is incorrect; the roles/storage.admin role gives a user full control over buckets and objects, which is more privilege than needed. Option D is incorrect; there is no such role as roles/storage.bucketList.
19. D. Logistic regression is a binary classifier algorithm. Options A, B, and C are all regularization techniques.
20. A. AutoML Tables is a service for generating machine learning models from structured data. Option B is incorrect; Kubeflow is an orchestration platform for running machine learning workloads in Kubernetes, which is more than is needed for this use case. Option C is incorrect; Cloud Firestore is a document database, not a machine learning service. Option D is incorrect because Spark MLlib requires more knowledge of machine learning than AutoML Tables, and therefore it is not as good an option for this use case.
21. B. TPUs are the correct accelerator because they are designed specifically to accelerate TensorFlow models. Option A is incorrect because, although GPUs would accelerate the model training, GPUs are not optimized for the low-precision matrix math that is performed when training deep learning networks. Option C is incorrect; shielded VMs have additional security controls, but they do not accelerate model training. Option D is incorrect; preemptible machines cost less than non-preemptible machines, but they do not provide acceleration.
22. C. Cloud Storage is an object storage system that meets all of the requirements. Option A is incorrect; Cloud Bigtable is a wide-column database. Option B is incorrect; BigQuery is an analytical database. Option D is incorrect; Cloud Spanner is a horizontally scalable relational database.
23. A. A data loss prevention API can be used to remove many forms of sensitive data, such as government identifiers. Option B is incorrect; encryption can help keep data from being read, but it does not remove or mask sensitive data. Option C is incorrect; Cloud Key Management is a service for storing and managing encryption keys. Option D is incorrect; Cloud Dataflow is a batch and stream processing service.
24. B. The --max-instances parameter limits the number of concurrently executing function instances. Option A is incorrect; --max-limit is not a parameter used with function deployments. Option C is incorrect; there is no --max-instance parameter to set in the resource hierarchy. Option D is incorrect; there is a way to specify a limit using the --max-instances parameter.
25. B. Stackdriver Logging is used to collect semi-structured data about events. Option A is incorrect; Stackdriver Debugger is used to inspect the state of running code. Option C is incorrect because Stackdriver Monitoring collects performance metrics, not custom data. Option D is incorrect; Stackdriver Trace is used to collect information about the time required to execute functions in a call stack.
26. B. BigQuery is a managed service that is well suited to data warehousing, and it can scale to petabytes of storage. Option A is incorrect; Cloud SQL will not scale to meet future needs. Option C is incorrect; Bigtable is a NoSQL, wide-column database, which is not suitable for use with a data warehouse design that uses a relational data model. Option D is incorrect; Cloud Spanner is a transactional, scalable relational database.
