# 8. Looking Forward

It is a characteristic of excellent AI line managers and project managers to direct world-class data scientists to build AI solutions that match the company’s strategic business goals. The challenge is not having ideas on how AI could change the world. The challenge is to build practical, helpful AI solutions delivering concrete benefits and, afterward, running these AI solutions over the years.

The various book chapters elaborated all relevant success factors from shaping and managing AI projects, organizing testing and quality assurance, integrating AI components into broader application landscapes and operating them, to incorporating ethics, compliance, and security-related topics. These are the concepts every AI line or project manager needs to set up, organize, and manage an AI department and its project portfolio.

When data scientists move to a new project, they might require a deep understanding of different AI algorithms or frameworks. In contrast, AI managers can master various projects with the know-how presented in this book. Their tasks are very similar, whether the projects are about voice biometrics, text understanding, support chatbots, automated credit ratings, or autonomous cars and planes. Thus, if you are an AI project or line manager and made it to this page, it is time for me to congratulate you for taking the time and investing so much effort. I hope you enjoyed reading the book as much as I enjoyed structuring the topic and bringing it to paper. I wish you many successful AI projects in the years to come. Plus, I am sure you can move your company’s AI organization to the next level with the ideas you learned from this book!
