# 12. The Expanding Landscape

## Chapter 12. The Expanding Landscape

The landscape of tools that are available to interact with Linux containers is constantly evolving, especially with the significant adoption that Kubernetes has experienced for many years.

In this chapter, we are going to take a very quick tour of a few tools that are inspired by Docker but are often focused on improving specific use cases. This is not intended to be a comprehensive list but instead is intended to simply give you a taste of some of the categories and options that are available to explore.

## Client Tools

In this section, we are going to introduce three command-line tools: `nerdctl`, `podman`, and `buildah`. All of these tools might be useful to anyone familiar with Docker and its common workflows.

### nerdctl

Although [`crictl`](https://oreil.ly/zElq\_)[1](https://learning.oreilly.com/library/view/docker-up/9781098131814/ch12.html#idm46803124121664) is installed by default in many `containerd`-based environments, `nerdctl` is an easy-to-use Docker-compatible CLI for `containerd`, which is worth checking out. This means that `nerdctl` can provide a very easy migration path for people and scripts that use Docker but need to support `containerd` systems that are not running the Docker daemon.

As a quick example, if you spin up a small Kubernetes cluster with `kind`, which we discussed in [“Kind”](https://learning.oreilly.com/library/view/docker-up/9781098131814/ch10.html#k8s\_kind), you should end up with a `containerd`-based Kubernetes cluster that is not directly compatible with the `docker` CLI:

```
$ kind create cluster --name nerdctl
Creating cluster "nerdctl" …
…

$ docker container exec -ti nerdctl-control-plane /bin/bash
```

You should now be inside the `kind`/Kubernetes container.

**NOTE**

In the `curl` command that follows, you must ensure that you are downloading the correct version for your architecture. You will need to replace `${ARCH}` with either `amd64` or `arm64`, depending on your system. Also, feel free to try and [download the most recent version](https://github.com/containerd/nerdctl/releases) of `nerdctl`.

Once you have edited the following `curl` command and reassembled it into a single line, you should be able to download and extract the `nerdctl` client and then try a few commands with it:

```
root@nerdctl-control-plane:/# curl -s -L \
  "https://github.com/containerd/nerdctl/releases/download/v0.23.0/\
nerdctl-0.23.0-linux-${ARCH}.tar.gz" -o /tmp/nerdctl.tar.gz

root@nerdctl-control-plane:/# tar -C /usr/local/bin -xzf /tmp/nerdctl.tar.gz

root@nerdctl-control-plane:/# nerdctl namespace list

NAME      CONTAINERS    IMAGES    VOLUMES    LABELS
k8s.io    18            24        0

root@nerdctl-control-plane:/# nerdctl --namespace k8s.io container list

CONTAINER ID IMAGE                                  … NAMES
07ae69902d11 registry.k8s.io/pause:3.7              … k8s://kube-system/core…
0b241db0485f registry.k8s.io/coredns/coredns:v1.9.3 … k8s://kube-system/core…
…

root@nerdctl-control-plane:/# nerdctl --namespace k8s.io container run --rm \
                              --net=host debian sleep 5

docker.io/library/debian:latest:  resolved       |+++++++++++++++++++++++++++|
index-sha256:e538…4bff:           done           |+++++++++++++++++++++++++++|
manifest-sha256:9b0e…2f7d:        done           |+++++++++++++++++++++++++++|
config-sha256:d917…d33c:          done           |+++++++++++++++++++++++++++|
layer-sha256:f606…5ddf:           done           |+++++++++++++++++++++++++++|
elapsed: 6.4 s                    total:  52.5 M (8.2 MiB/s)

root@nerdctl-control-plane:/# exit
```

In most cases, `docker` commands can be used with almost no alteration by `nerdctl`. The one change that might stand out is the need to often provide a namespace value. This is because `containerd` provides [a fully namespaced API](https://github.com/containerd/containerd/blob/main/docs/namespaces.md), and we need to specify which one we are interested in interacting with.

Once you have exited the `kind` container, you can go ahead and delete it:

```
$ kind delete cluster --name nerdctl

Deleting cluster "nerdctl" …
```

### podman and buildah

[`podman`](https://podman.io/) and [`buildah`](https://buildah.io/) are a set of tools from Red Hat that were created early on to provide a container workflow that did not rely on a daemon process, like Docker. It is heavily used within the Red Hat community and rethinks the way that images are built and containers are run and managed.

**TIP**

You can find a good introduction to [`podman` and `buildah` for Docker users on the Red Hat blog](https://developers.redhat.com/blog/2019/02/21/podman-and-buildah-for-docker-users).

```
$ kind create cluster --name podman
Creating cluster "podman" …
…

$ docker container exec -ti podman-control-plane /bin/bash
```

**TIP**

An overview of installing and using `kind` can be found in [“Kind”](https://learning.oreilly.com/library/view/docker-up/9781098131814/ch10.html#k8s\_kind).

You should now be inside the `kind`/Kubernetes container:

```
root@podman-control-plane:/# apt update
Get:1 http://security.ubuntu.com/ubuntu jammy-security InRelease [110 kB]
…

root@podman-control-plane:/# apt install -y podman
Reading package lists… Done
…

root@podman-control-plane:/# podman container run -d --rm \
                             --name test debian sleep 120
9b6b333313c0d54e2da6cda49f2787bc5213681d90dac145a9f64128f3e18631

root@podman-control-plane:/# podman container list

CONTAINER ID  IMAGE                            COMMAND    …  NAMES
548a2f709785  docker.io/library/debian:latest  sleep 120  …  test

root@podman-control-plane:/# podman container stop test
test
```

Unlike `docker` (which interfaces with the Docker daemon) and `nerdctl` (which interfaces with `containerd`), `podman` skips the container engine and instead directly interfaces with an underlying container runtime, like `runc`.

Although `podman build` can be used to build containers as well, `buildah` provides an advanced interface for image building that makes it possible to script the whole image-building process and remove the need to rely on the _Dockerfile_ format (or _Containerfile_, as `podman` calls it).

We won’t dig into the details of `buildah` here, but you can try a very simple example in the `kind` container, and if you are interested in alternatives to the traditional `Dockerfile` approach, or the newer alternatives provided by BuildKit’s [LBB interface](https://github.com/moby/buildkit#exploring-llb), you can read more about `buildah` online via [GitHub](https://github.com/containers/buildah) and the [Red Hat blog](https://www.redhat.com/sysadmin/building-buildah).

To try out a `buildah` script in the `kind` container, go ahead and run the following commands:

```
root@podman-control-plane:/# cat > apache.sh <<"EOF"
```

```
#!/usr/bin/env bash

set -x

ctr1=$(buildah from "${1:-fedora}")

## Get all updates and install the apache server
buildah run "$ctr1" -- dnf update -y
buildah run "$ctr1" -- dnf install -y httpd

## Include some buildtime annotations
buildah config --annotation "com.example.build.host=$(uname -n)" "$ctr1"

## Run our server and expose the port
buildah config --cmd "/usr/sbin/httpd -D FOREGROUND" "$ctr1"
buildah config --port 80 "$ctr1"

## Commit this container to an image name
buildah commit "$ctr1" "${2:-myrepo/apache}"
```

```
EOF

root@podman-control-plane:/# chmod +x apache.sh
root@podman-control-plane:/# ./apache.sh

++ buildah from fedora
+ ctr1=fedora-working-container-1
+ buildah run fedora-working-container-1 -- dnf update -y
…
Writing manifest to image destination
Storing signatures
037c7a7c532a47be67f389d7fd3e4bbba64670e080b120d93744e147df5adf26

root@podman-control-plane:/# exit
```

Once you have exited the `kind` container, you can go ahead and delete it:

```
$ kind delete cluster --name podman

Deleting cluster "podman" …
```

## All-in-One Developer Tools

Although Docker Desktop is a very useful tool, changes in Docker’s licensing and the broader technology landscape have led some people and organizations to look for alternative tools. In this section, we will take a quick look at Rancher Desktop and Podman Desktop and how they can be used to provide some of the functionality of Docker Desktop while also bringing some interesting features of their own.

### Rancher Desktop

[Rancher Desktop](https://rancherdesktop.io/) is designed to provide a very similar experience to Docker Desktop while focusing specifically on Kubernetes integration. It uses [k3s](https://k3s.io/) to provide a certified, lightweight Kubernetes backend and can use either `containerd` or `dockerd` (`moby`) as the container runtime.

**TIP**

You should probably quit Docker (and/or Podman) Desktop, if either one is running, before trying out Rancher Desktop, since they all spin up a VM that will consume system resources.

After downloading, installing, and launching Rancher Desktop, you will have a local Kubernetes cluster, which, by default, is using `containerd` and can be interacted with via `nerdctl`.

**NOTE**

The exact location where Rancher Desktop installs the `nerdctl` binary might vary a bit depending on which operating system you are using. You should initially try and make sure that you are using the version that was packaged with the Rancher Desktop.

```
$ ${HOME}/.rd/bin/nerdctl --namespace k8s.io image list

REPOSITORY     TAG     IMAGE ID      …  PLATFORM     SIZE       BLOB SIZE
moby/buildkit  v0.8.3  171689e43026  …  linux/amd64  119.2 MiB  53.9 MiB
moby/buildkit  <none>  171689e43026  …  linux/amd64  119.2 MiB  53.9 MiB
…
```

Don’t forget to quit Rancher Desktop when you are done; otherwise the VM will stay running and consume additional resources.

### Podman Desktop

[Podman Desktop](https://podman-desktop.io/) is focused on providing a daemon-less container tool that still provides the seamless experience that developers on all of the major operating systems have grown accustomed to.

**TIP**

You should probably quit Docker (and/or Rancher) Desktop, if either one is running, before trying out Podman Desktop, since they all spin up a VM that will consume system resources.

After downloading, installing, and launching Podman Desktop, you will see an application window on the Home tab. If Podman Desktop does not detect the `podman` CLI on your system, it will prompt you to install it via a button labeled Install. This should walk you through the installation of the `podman` client. When the Podman Desktop VM, which can be controlled from the command line via the `podman machine` command, is not started, click the Run Podman switch, and then wait a few moments. The switch should disappear, and you should see the “Podman is running” message.

**NOTE**

The exact location where Podman Desktop installs the `podman` binary might vary a bit depending on which operating system you are using. You should initially make sure that you are using the version that was installed via Podman Desktop.

To test the system, give this a try:

```
$ podman run quay.io/podman/hello

!… Hello Podman World …!

         .--"--.
       / -     - \
      / (O)   (O) \
   ~~~| -=(,Y,)=- |
    .---. /   \   |~~
 ~/  o  o \~~~~.----. ~~
  | =(X)= |~  / (O (O) \
   ~~~~~~~  ~| =(Y_)=-  |
  ~~~~    ~~~|   U      |~~

Project:   https://github.com/containers/podman
Website:   https://podman.io
Documents: https://docs.podman.io
Twitter:   @Podman_io
```

When you are done exploring Podman Desktop, you can go ahead and shut down the VM by clicking the Preferences tab, selecting Resources → Podman → Podman Machine, and then clicking the Stop button.

At this point, you can go ahead and quit the Podman Desktop application.

**TIP**

You can also start and stop the Podman VM by using the `podman machine start` and `podman machine stop` commands.

## Wrap-Up

Docker’s place in technology history is well established. There is no doubt that the introduction of Docker took the existing Linux container technology, extended it with the image format, and then made the concepts and technology accessible to engineers all around the world.

We can argue about whether things are better today than they were before Linux containers and Docker, and we can debate about which tools and workflows are better, but in the end, much of that comes down to how each tool is used and how those workflows are designed.

No tools will magically solve all your problems, and any tool can be implemented so poorly that it makes everything much worse than it was before. This is why it is so important to spend significant time thinking about the process workflow that you want to implement from at least three angles. First, what inputs and outputs do we need the workflow to support? Second, how easy will the workflow be for the people who need to use it every day or just once a year? And third, how easy will it be to run and maintain for the people who must ensure that the system runs smoothly and securely at all times?

Once you have a good picture of what you are trying to achieve, then you can start to pick the tools that will help you enable these goals.

[1](https://learning.oreilly.com/library/view/docker-up/9781098131814/ch12.html#idm46803124121664-marker) Full URL: [_https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/cri-tools/blob/master/docs/crictl.md_](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/cri-tools/blob/master/docs/crictl.md)
